docs(specs): Customizability (#903)
consensus-shipyard/ipc: specs/customizability.md

```rust
#[derive(Delegate)]
#[delegate(IpldBlockOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(ActorOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(CryptoOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(DebugOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(EventOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(MessageOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(NetworkOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(RandomnessOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(SelfOps, where = "C: CallManager")]
#[delegate(SendOps<K>, generics = "K", where = "K: CustomKernel")]
#[delegate(UpgradeOps<K>, generics = "K", where = "K: CustomKernel")]
pub struct CustomKernelImpl<C>(pub DefaultKernel<C>);
```

[fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/examples/mycustomkernel.rs#L27](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/examples/mycustomkernel.rs#L27)

### **2. Implementing all necessary functions for the syscall**

> Implement `my_custom_syscall` Here is where we implement our custom syscall:

Reviewer: > plement `my_custom_syscall` Here is

newline or a header missed before `Here`?

Let’s create a `customsyscall` folder in `ipc/fendermint/actors/` and then create a file called [actor.rs](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/actor.rs) in that new folder. Here we want to create a very simple actor, which when invoked (received a message on its Invoke method) will call the new syscall and return its value:

```rust
fvm_sdk::sys::fvm_syscalls! {
    module = "my_custom_kernel";
    pub fn my_custom_syscall() -> Result<u64>;
}

pub struct Actor;
impl Actor {
    fn invoke(rt: &impl Runtime) -> Result<u64, ActorError> {
        rt.validate_immediate_caller_is(std::iter::once(&SYSTEM_ACTOR_ADDR))?;

        unsafe {
            let value = my_custom_syscall().unwrap();
            Ok(value)
        }
    }
}

impl ActorCode for Actor {
    type Methods = Method;

    fn name() -> &'static str {
        CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME
    }

    actor_dispatch! {
        Invoke => invoke,
    }
}
```

[fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/actor.rs#L14](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/actor.rs#L14)

> Even though this is Rust code, IPC will compile it as a Wasm target and then run the compiled Wasm code inside FVM as an actor. However, we want to share some of the code between Wasm and IPC, such as the actor name `CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME` and the `Invoke` method enum. We will define these in a separate file called `[shared.rs](http://shared.rs/)` as follows:

Reviewer: > http://shared.rs/

that's a placeholder?

> Even though this is Rust code, IPC will compile it as a Wasm target and then run the compiled Wasm code inside FVM as an actor. However, we want to share some of the code between Wasm and IPC, such as the actor name `CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME` and the `Invoke` method enum. We will define these in a separate file called `[shared.rs](http://shared.rs/)` as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though this is Rust code, IPC will compile it as a Wasm target and then run the compiled Wasm code inside FVM as an actor. However, we want to share some of the code between Wasm and IPC, such as the actor name `CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME` and the `Invoke` method enum. We will define these in a separate file called `[shared.rs](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/shared.rs)` as follows:
```

```rust
use num_derive::FromPrimitive;

pub const CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME: &str = "customsyscall";

#[derive(FromPrimitive)]
#[repr(u64)]
pub enum Method {
    Invoke = frc42_dispatch::method_hash!("Invoke"),
}
```

[fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/shared.rs](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/shared.rs#L1)

> We next need to write a `[lib.rs](http://lib.rs/)` file which exports the shared code and only compiles `actor.rs` if we are building the Wasm actor:

Reviewer: > http://lib.rs/

placeholder?

> We next need to write a `[lib.rs](http://lib.rs/)` file which exports the shared code and only compiles `actor.rs` if we are building the Wasm actor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We next need to write a `[lib.rs](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/actors/customsyscall/src/lib.rs)` file which exports the shared code and only compiles `actor.rs` if we are building the Wasm actor:
```

- `fendermint/vm/actor_interface/src/lib.rs`: export the constants to IPC
</aside>

### **7. Load and deploy actor at genesis**

We have so far created a new kernel and syscall, switched IPC to use that kernel and created an actor which calls the new syscall. However, in order to call this actor in IPC, we must load it from the custom_actors_bundle.

To do this open `fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/genesis.rs` file and in the `init` function add our customsyscall actor right after creating the `chainmetadata` actor:

```rust
// Initialize the customsyscall actor which gives an example of calling a custom syscall
state
    .create_custom_actor(
        fendermint_actor_customsyscall::CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_NAME,
        customsyscall::CUSTOMSYSCALL_ACTOR_ID,
        &EMPTY_ARR,
        TokenAmount::zero(),
        None,
    )
    .context("failed to create customsyscall actor")?;
```

[fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/genesis.rs#L251](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/98497363a10e08236325e6d5c52755b9fcd52958/fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/genesis.rs#L251)

Your actor has now been deployed and we should be able to send it messages!

> # Genesis Parameters

Reviewer: Should this maybe be a separate spec doc?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, definitely belongs in a separate doc.

The contents of the `genesis.json` file are essentially the `Genesis` structure defined in the [genesis](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/tree/specs/fendermint/vm/genesis) crate. It has the following properties:

- `chain_name` is an arbitrary name for the chain, which will be hashed to become the numeric `chain_id`; in the context of IPC subnets the `chain_name` is expected to be the textual representation of the `SubnetID`

> - `timestamp` is the number of seconds since UNIX epoch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `timestamp` is the UNIX timestamp of a moment when genesis was created by the first Validator
```

something like this, maybe?

Author: Great, thanks!

- `network_version` is used by the FVM to select gas pricing policy
- `base_fee` is measured in *atto* and represents the base price for gas

> - `power_scale` is the number of decimals to take into account from the FIL token collateral balance when converting it into voting power expressed as `u64`, which is what CometBFT expects. For example if the scale is 0 then every 1 FIL gives 1 voting power, if it’s 3 then every 0.001 FIL does, and if it’s -1 then every 10 FIL. The power is rounded upwards, so that we don’t end up with 0 power, which would be rejected by CometBFT; for example if the scale is 1, then both 1.1 FIL and 1.9 FIL give 2 power.

Reviewer: maybe mention that it only works for the `Collateral` (ie PoS) mode?

Reviewer 2: So... as we've noted recently, this applies in `Federated` mode too.

        - `bottom_up_check_period` is the expected checkpoint frequency for the subnet. It is important that subnet nodes create checkpoints in the ledger at the same heights; doing otherwise would be a consensus failure.
        - `majority_percentage` is the checkpoint quorum size expressed as a number between 0 and 100; it should be at least 67 to be Byzantine fault tolerant.
        - `active_validators_limit` is the number of validators who can participate in the subnet consensus; it is important that both the parent and the child subnet agree on this value, so they select the same top validators the same way.

The `genesis.json` file is usually constructed in one of two ways:

- Using the `fendermint genesis` [CLI commands](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/specs/fendermint/app/options/src/genesis.rs) to incrementally add validators and accounts as described [here](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/specs/docs/fendermint/running.md#genesis).
- Using the `fenderming genesis ipc from-parent` command to fetch the parameters from the subnet actor on the parent subnet and export them to file.

# Gas policy

> The gas price in the FVM is by default [determined](https://github.com/filecoin-project/ref-fvm/blob/c39d880d086aa2e771c7190163436e02715d80f3/fvm/src/machine/mod.rs#L156) by the network version when the `NetworkConfig` is created, but could further be customised by assigning to the `price_list` field. Should Fendermint have to do that, it would be in the [constructor](https://github.com/consensus-shipyard/ipc/blob/7af25c4c860f5ab828e8177927a0f8b6b7a7cc74/fendermint/vm/interpreter/src/fvm/state/exec.rs#L132) of the `FvmExecState`.

Reviewer: > assigning to the `price_list` field

`price_list` is hypothetical here or where does it come from?

Reviewer 2: The FVM will return a `price_list` for the specified Filecoin network version, but the user can customize it before creating an FVM Machine.

The `base_fee` set in genesis is also part of the gas policy. Currently it’s a static value, but it’s part of the upgradable parts of the `FvmExecState` and `FvmStateParams`, with its history maintained by the `App`. The interpreters could have logic to change its value based on the blocks they process.

> Also take a look at the following issue to see another proposal to use the `chainmetadata` actor to track the `base_fee` :

Reviewer: Add TODO or link to the issue?

Author: The link is to an internal linear issue, will remove this and mention adding this as a GH issue
